Hey everyone, Dr. Shaw here and welcome to the prostadonics video series. This is the coolest specialty in dentistry, but as a prostadonist, of course, I'm a bit biased, but nevertheless, I'm really excited to teach you guys this topic and we're kicking things off with a banger, a dentilist anatomy. In this video, I'll be going over the maxillary and mandibular dentilist anatomy, and I'll also point out the high yield points that you should remember for the exam. Okay, let's get into it. We'll start off by identifying some important maxillary dentilous structures. The first being the incisive pill which is an oval-shaped elevation located on the roof of the mouth. On either side of the inciz pill is the palatine rug and running down between the rug is the median palatal suture which joins the left and right maxilla. The residual ridge refers to the size and shape of the alvolar ridge after removal of the natural dentition and is an important area of support for the maxillary denture. More on that later. Next we have the labial frenum which is a piece of connective tissue that is located at the very front of the mouth and attaches the lips to the gums. On either side of the labial frenum is the buckle frenum which you guessed it attaches the gums to the inner cheek. Now the labial vestibule is located between the labial frenum and the buckle frenum. Then we have the tuberosity which is a rounded bony protrusion posterior to the residual ridge that can interfere with the mandibular denture if it grows significantly. The hamular notch on the other hand approximates the posterior extension of the maxillary denture. And connecting the buckle frenum to the hamler notch we have the buckle vestibule. Next we have the vibrating line which marks the junction between the hard pallet and the soft pallet and can be identified by having the patient repeatedly say ah. Now the soft pallet area right behind the vibrating line is composed of non-cratinized tissue. And we also have some minor salary glands here. Sometimes a portion of the soft pallet is referred to as the posterior palatal seal area as we rely on the compressibility of the tissue here to give us our denture seal. Next we have the phobia palatina which are two small pits right adjacent to the vibrating line. There are also several important structures on the maxillary denture itself that are created during the complete denture fabrication process. The labial flange is the portion of the denture that occupies the labial vestibule. And the buckle flange is the portion that occupies the buckle vestibule. And finally, we have the distalbuckle flange. Together, the flanges provide a peripheral seal and help stabilize the maxillary denture. Now that we've gone over the maxillary dentulous structures, I'm going to emphasize the high yield points that you guys should remember. First, the primary stress bearing areas of the maxillary denture are the hard pallet and the alvolola ridge. And this should make sense to you. The hard pallet is very resorption resistant, making it able to withstand loadbearing stress. As for the residual ridge, although not as resorption resistant as the pallet, it is the only other bone supported region besides the hard pallet that is horizontal, which allows it to withstand the forces put on it by the denture. Second point I want you guys to remember is that a deep buckle vestibule provides greater surface area, retention, and stability. So when the vestibule is properly filled with the denture flange, the maxillary denture will resist vertical and horizontal dislodgement. Next point concerns the coronoid process which defines the distalmost extension of the maxillary denture otherwise known as the distalbuckle flange area and it does so during the border molding process. Now, if this isn't done properly and we end up with a distalbal buckle flange that is too thick or too wide, let's say, we can have interferences with the patient's mandibular movements. In other words, when the patient moves side to side, the cornoid process is going to hit the bulky distalbal buckle flange causing soreness, mandibular restriction or even dislodgement of the denture. Next, we have the allimportant posterior pal seal area. To further prevent dislodgement of the denture, the posterior pal seal resists horizontal and lateral forces acting on the maxillary denture as it terminates on soft resilient tissue. Thus, the posterior pal seal provides retention and stability and is determined by tissue resilience. Okay. Another point to remember is that the incisive pill is the anatomical structure that is least likely to change and resorb after full mouth extraction. And this makes sense because the incisive pill isn't a bone supported region. It contains nerves, arteries, and veins. So, it's resistant to resorption. The last point I want you guys to remember concerns the maxillary tuberosity. When it comes to the patient's anatomy, the maxillary tuberosity can sometimes come into contact with the retroolar pad. When this happens, it needs to be surgically reduced prior to the denture fabrication process. All right, guys. Enough of the mexilla. Now let's move on to identifying some important mandibular adential structures. Like the mixilla here we have the labial and buckle frenum. But in the mandible we also have a third frenum called the lingual frenum which connects the bottom of the tongue to the floor of the mouth. The mandibular denture also has labial and buckle flanges that support the denture. The residual ridge shown here in green is also present. And at the distal ends of the residual ridge are the retroolar pads which are triangular soft pads of tissue 2/3 of which the denture base should extend over. Bound medially by the residual ridge and distally by the retroolar pads are the buckle shelves which are just bony landmarks between the alvola ridge and the external oblique line. And lastly we have the lingual flange. Okay. Now let's emphasize the high yield points that you guys should remember. Starting with primary stress bearing areas which are the buckle shelves and the retroolar pads. The retroolar pad similar to the hard pallet is an area that is resistant to resorption and is therefore a consistent and stable landmark throughout a patient's adentialist timeline. The buckle shelf on the other hand is also very resorption resistant and it's composed of dense cortical bone allowing it to best withstand stress bearing loads. Now that you know why the retroolar pads are so important, this next point makes a whole lot of sense. In order to ensure our denture can rest on the retroolar pads, we need to ensure we capture it during our impression and that it's nicely transferred over to the cast that will be used to fabricate the denture. And as I mentioned before, if fabricated correctly, the mandibular denture will cover 2/3 of the height of the retroolar pads. This will add a great deal of stability and support to the denture. Last point I want to mention guys is about the myo hyoid muscle which bore removals the lingual flange and this is because the myo hyoid functions to elevate the tongue and the floor of the mouth during swallowing. Therefore, the depth and contour of the dentures lingual flange is determined by the position of the myo hyoid muscle. In turn, it would make sense that if a patient's myo hyoid is rigid or unable to fully relax, the denture would then have a shorter lingual flange. All right, guys. Time to take what we just learned and do some practice problems together. Which of the following describes the anatomy posterior to the maxillary complete denture border? Remember guys, this is referring to the soft pallet. So, take a minute or pause the video if you need, but the answer is B. non-corratinized gingiva and minor salivary glands. Coratinized gingiva is typically non-displaceable and we know this area of the mouth does not contain canelis bone. So that would be incorrect as well. All right guys, moving on to question number two. Each structure affects border molding of the maxillary labial flange except one which is the exception. Again, pause the video if you need but the answer is C. Infraorbital rim. Now even though we didn't directly discuss some of these structures, you should have been able to arrive at the answer pretty easily, we know that the zygomatic and orvicularis orus muscles are within the vicinity of the labial flange as is the labial frenum. Therefore, during border molding, they will certainly have an impact on the labial flange. The only option that is kind of distant is the infrororbital rim. It's also a bony structure which would have been another clue pointing to it being the answer. All right, let's move on to example question number three. Which reference point on the retroolar pad is used when determining the placement of the occlusal plane? Again, pause the video if you need, but the answer is C. 2/3 of the retroolar pad. I think I mentioned this a few times, so if you got it wrong, make sure you go back and watch the video. The retroolar pad is a stable clinical landmark because it's resistant to bone resorption and its position remains constant even after teeth are extracted. So, a denture base that covers up to 2/3 of the height of the retroolar pads adds stability by creating an additional plane to resist dislodgement. All right, guys. Here are our summary points. And that is it for this video. Thanks for watching and I'll see you next time. [Music] [Music]